Dr. F. P. Jaggi. Today's date is January 24th,
1980, and this is Terry Anderson.
Today's interview is with Dr. Frederick P. Jaggi,
Jr., retired professor of Veterinary Medicine.
Today's date is January 24th, 1980. Now,
you were born on May 5th of 1900 in Mexico, and you
attended high school in San Antonio. Could you
tell us about your experiences in high school?
Well, I didn't have any particular experiences in
high school that were different from most of the
other boys in high school. Oh, we participated in
sports of one kind and another, and then the usual
academic
courses that everybody took, But beyond that, I
had no particular activities.
In other words, lots of the boys went in for
debating societies and all that. I did not have
time for that because I worked after school. What
kind of work did you do? Delivering shoes for a shoe
company there.
You were born in Mexico. That's right. How'd you
get up to San Antonio, and could you tell us about
your parents' background?
Well, how far back you want to go? Well, go ahead, go
ahead. My mother and father were from Eagle Pass
originally, and then my father went to Mexico
working for mining companies, and then I was born
in Pachuca, Mexico, the state of Hidalgo. And my
father was, well, they called him a mining
engineer. Pachuca was, at that time, was the
biggest silver mining center in the world, I
guess. And
I was born there. We left there and went to Mexico
City. Let me just say you were wondering about my
education. I started out with a governess. There
was four of us children, and we had a governess then
for one year. After that, I went to the Methodist
Mission School there in Pachuca. And when the
Madero Revolution took over, the town in 1911. We
moved to Mexico City and I went to the American
school there. And we stayed there till, well, the
end of the summer of 1912 when we moved to San
Antonio. Then I went through the San Antonio
schools. Now did your father have an engineering
degree? No. Could you tell me about his education?
No, I can't. All I know is Well he went to St. Mary's
School in San Antonio, I know that, or University
or whatever it was, which is still there, and
beyond that I can't tell you anything about his
education. Did he work for a company or did he work
for the Mexican government? Yes, he worked for a
company. Now you were down in Mexico at a rather
turbulent time. Do you, I know you're only 11 or 12
years old at this time, but do you remember
anything, any episodes during the Mexican
Revolution? Well, I remember when the, when the
Madarizas took over the town of Pachuca, they came
in and shot it up and burnt some of the buildings and
the, I guess you'd call it the National Guard or
Army, whatever it was, It's a little different
from our system in that each state more or less
operated independently. At any rate, there was a
barracks there with soldiers, and they just took
out. They left. And after two or three days while
the Maderistas established Oh, some sort of
semblance of order there. They executed a man
which I visited, which I viewed. I shouldn't say
visited, I viewed it. I'm glad I didn't visit it.
They shot him? Yes, they shot him. He was a
bureaucrat on the other side? Well, no, they got
him for, oh, you might call it vandalizing or
looting. because all the workmen, the peons and
all those, when the maderistas started into town,
they just became a mob and did a lot of looting, and
they're the ones who burned the buildings that
were burned and that sort of thing.
The governor, of course, took out because this was
a different regime, and they finally
straightened things out. It didn't last too long,
that is the disorder, and then it went on from
there, and we went to Mexico City, and Madero was
president then. Diaz had been. He overthrew
Madero overthrew Diaz, and then he became
president and was in Mexico City during the time
that we were living there, and beyond that I can't
tell you anything about there. This is a time of
rather intense nationalism for the Mexicans. Was
there any anti-Americanism that you can remember
at that time? Oh yes, there was some. There's
always been antagonism to Americans. Americans
have the peculiar habit of not understanding
foreigners. They think they should all behave and
act like Americans, and well, the Americans seem
to feel like they're a little superior. So there's
always a resentment there. And yes, there were
some anti-American demonstrations
Not bad, but your family? No, no, our family was
not, no. Okay, let's move north then, back up to San
Antonio. What were the subjects that you liked the
most when you were in high school?
I didn't particularly care too much for any of the
subjects. I guess mechanical drawing and shop
work, things of that nature were my principal
interests. I never was a whiz at mathematics or
ancient history or any of that stuff. I shouldn't
call it stuff, but those courses, and
well I did like I think probably botany. We didn't
have zoology, but we did have botany and we had an
excellent teacher, and I liked that. It was very
interesting. How large was the school? How many
students?
Oh, there was only one high school in San Antonio at
that time. That was Old Main Avenue High School,
and I imagine there was about 2,000 in the high
school.
I understand they must have seven or eight high
schools there now. Yeah, yeah. Now a rather
interesting world event was exploding at this
time. World War I, 1914, erupts in Europe, and then
we joined the war in 1917, and you're 17 years old at
that time. Do you remember what it was, if the war
itself had much of an impact on high school, or
right after you got out of high school? Not so much
impact on high school, It did. The people, of
course, reacted to it. And then in the summer, I
guess it was, of 1918,
three of us went up to work in the wheat harvest,
which was
popular at that time. They were short of hands, and
we went up through Kansas and South Dakota working
in the wheat harvest. On the way back, I had, I guess
I was 18 then, and I registered for the draft in
Amarillo on the way home. But beyond that, it did
not affect us a whole lot. We had lots of soldiers
there in San Antonio, and Fort Sam Houston, Camp
Trev, Kelly Field, and all that, and
Oh, we played a lot of them football.
We didn't get very far with them, but nevertheless
we did play them, and some of their people from time
to time coached us. That is the high school team.
Pretty good relations between the high school
kids and the servicemen? Oh yes, yes. Good, good
relations as far as I can far as I was concerned, we
had good relations, and I don't remember any
disagreeableness between any of the students and
any of the service people.
Southern Texas is heavily influenced by German
immigration a century ago, and I was, I'm sure that
one of the languages in high school was German at
this time, and in many high schools across the
country during World War I they banned the
instruction of German language. Do you remember
if they did that at San Antonio? We didn't have
German in the high school. We had Spanish. Spanish
and Latin. And in the grade schools before the war
they had, in some of the schools they had German,
and in some of them they had Spanish.
But They didn't have German in high school. Now why
exactly did you go up to the Midwest to help with the
grain harvest? Well, I had to do something for the
summer. It seemed adventuresome, and we got us an
old Model T Ford three of us, and we and we took off.
We got 50 cents an hour working in- Fifty cents an
hour? Yeah, big money. That is pretty good. So
working in the harvest and we'd stay in one place
until that was harvested out and then we'd move on
north to places that were just starting up and
Oh, we did too much exploring, I guess, to make much
money. We wanted to see this and that and the Black
Hills and Montana, Wyoming. So we spent most of our
money just traveling around, looking at things,
and then we'd run out of money and then we'd go back
to work somewhere. 50 cents an hour seems pretty
good for 1917, considering that it wasn't until
1937 when we get the first minimum wage, and that's
only 25 cents an hour. Well, this was set by the
government. Really? And in order to get workers, I
think at first it was 45 cents, and then they went to
50 cents an hour. And, of course, you've got your
room and board. Yeah. on these farms. The rooms
were usually questionable, but the food was all
right. Lots of it. We usually slept right on the
ground in our own blankets rather than go into
those places where all the granaries and places
that stick you to sleep. Were you drafted during
the war? No, the war ended before I got out of high
school. Oh, I thought you graduated in the summer
of 1918. Did you? No. From high school? No, in
January of 1919. Oh, okay, then the war just ended.
Okay. But you registered during the summer of 1918
and you did register? Yeah, in Amarillo on the way
home. And then that winter I graduated from high
school. Oh, okay. I thought you probably
graduated in June. No. No, I didn't graduate in
June. Why not? Well,
my education had lots of ups and downs. See, I was in
the school in Pachuca when the Motheristas took
the place over. And that was along in May, I guess it
was. And they closed the school down, so there's no
grades. Then I went to Mexico City, and they stuck
me in the grade there, fourth grade, I guess it was.
And it was a tough school.
It was right up there. Then we came to San Antonio,
and the grades were divided. And they put me in the
high fifth, I think it was. So that was in
September. So I didn't start with the low fifth. I
started the high fifth. Then in the midterm, I went
over to the next grade. And so I was all messed up
that way. So you were half a year behind? Yeah, half
a year behind or half a year ahead, whichever way
you want to look at it. Depends on which school you
were looking at. Why'd you decide to go on to
college? What else? Well, there's a lot of people
who don't go to college. Well, my folks wanted me to
go to college. and most of the boys I ran with in high
school went to college. And so I came to A&M. My
father had drilled it into me that I should be an
engineer, came to A&M, took a year of engineering,
and found that was not my forte. So then the
following year, that was a year wasted, I took
agriculture and finished in animal husbandry in
1924. And that is the class year that I am
associated with, identified with, in the Foreign
Student Association. And then after I graduated
in animal husbandry, scouting around, there
wasn't any jobs. except working for Purina, so I
had had some contact with the people in veterinary
school, so I came back and took veterinary
medicine, an intensive course. Of course, I had
credit for all the prerequisites, and so it took
me, well, I went Two years, summer and all, took a
heavy course. I had as many as, I think, 36 hours,
something like that, one term. We'd even have
night classes. Really? Night classes? Yeah.
Couldn't work it in the schedule, where there were
so few of us. There were about six in your class? No,
it was only four. Four in your class.
Well, we just shift the things around so that we
could have enough people to make a class.
Finally, I finished in 1926.
got my degree in veterinary medicine in 1926. Can
you describe the college campus back in 1920?
Well,
the only dormitories were on the military walk,
what was called military walk at that time, and
Gine Hall had just been built. It was at the end of
the military, one end of the military walk and
Spezo Hall was at the other end. And essentially
everybody except some of what we called the
casuals, men who had been in the service or for some
reason or other weren't in the Corps, everybody
was in the Corps and on the military walk. And
that's where we'd have our formations. meal
formations and all that stuff.
Well, let's
go the other way. The front of the campus was at
the railroad tracks where the depot was. Then
there was a gravel
street up to the Military Walk.
Goodwin Hall on the right, YMCA on the left when you
got to the end of it.
The President's House was still there. It burnt
several years ago.
It was down there by Speza Hall.
I might mention this. that they didn't have enough
dormitories as the enrollment increased some.
When I was there it finally reached 2,000 and a
little more. And they built some, put up a tent city
out there. Really? A tent city for the corpsmen?
Yeah. Four men to a tent that was walled up on That's
really what we call temporary housing. And they
had a bathhouse, a central bathhouse out there,
and they called it Hollywood.
Then in back of the, well the, what we used to call
the administration building, which know what
they call it now, academic building, the big
building with the dome.
That was the center of things academically, and
back of that was the chemistry building, which is
gone. Where the library is now. Yeah, and textual
engineering was on one side, on the other side.
Then Francis Hall was about a block down from the
academic building.
Then the end of the campus going towards what is now
Highway 6 or Texas Avenue was a horse barn, and it
was there about where the administration
building is.
There are 2,000 students in Yeah, they finally
made $2,000. There wasn't that many when I was a
freshman, but finally made $2,000. What did you
think of Core Life? Did it play any role whatsoever
in your decision to come to A&M? Not particularly.
I guess the cost was one of the big things. A&M was
pretty reasonable at that time, and I guess still
is, relatively speaking. But it was very
reasonable, and I could go home for $350 and make a
term.
Room, board, laundry, and all. So that was one of
the big reasons. Well, there's a lot of different
universities in the state. and some even closer to
San Antonio, like University of Texas. Why'd you
decide over A&M, over those other ones? Well, I
don't know that I can really answer that. They did,
I was urged
by some to go to the University of Texas and join a
fraternity, but I couldn't afford those things.
We just didn't have the money. Now,
in 1924 you started in School of Veterinary
Medicine. Could you describe the curriculum?
Well, as I say, mine was kind of mixed up because I
was so irregular, but course anatomy, that was one
of the big things, anatomy and bacteriology,
pathology, well no that came afterwards,
embryology. Dr. Francis taught the anatomy and
embryology
and
And as I say, I can't give it to you as freshman year,
sophomore year, because I was all mixed up. What
about the students? What about your student
colleagues? Could you tell me about them? Where
they were from, their quality, and what did you
think of those people? Oh, they were good. Now,
well, Two of them were local boys from around here,
and they were all smart enough, and made a pretty
good life for themselves afterwards, very
successful. And then we had a few from here and
there, I can't remember where they were from.
Dr. Burns was in there with us about that time. He
was from Cuero. He was just a little bit ahead of me,
maybe half a year or something like that, or a year
maybe. But he was in school with me and a man from
Texarkana, I believe. Just here and there, just
like all the students are now, just kind of
spotted. Okay, okay. Another question. You said
that engineering wasn't and animal sciences was
your forte. Why did you decide to continue? Was it
just because there was only a job with Purina and or
what are the other reasons for you desiring to
continue and going on to become a doctor of
veterinarian medicine? Well I had contacts with
it while I was taking agriculture and that phase of
education was much more interesting to me than was
just agriculture or the agricultural courses.
So I just kind of drifted in and I had lots of good
friends in the veterinary school There wasn't
many in the veterinary school, but we were good
friends. Did they have, and if they did, did they
offer you a scholarship or anything like that? Oh,
I didn't have scholarships. Didn't have
scholarships? No, they didn't have
scholarships. That was to come later. Okay. Let's
turn to a minute to the instruction. What did you
think of the quality of instruction in the early
1920s? Oh, it was good. It was excellent. Most of
the men, in some respects, I guess what they'd
consider now were overworked because they taught
many courses. Dr. Francis was one of the, I guess,
one of the greatest men I've ever known or had any
contact with.
Dr. Marsteller was quite outstanding. Dr.
Leonard over in the hospital.
It seemed Dr. Francis was dean. Marsteller became
dean later. And well, we had some good men there.
Dr. Price, who taught parasitology and
histology. and bacteriology, public health.
What a teaching load. He taught all those? Oh,
yeah. Shoot, all of them. There wasn't but about
six teachers. I know. They had to cover the
waterfront. Yeah, yeah. I've seen how small the
staff was by looking at . There was Blackberg, S.N.
Blackberg. He taught physiology and toxicology.
I think that's all he taught.
Now, Price taught immunology. And then
Dr. Leonard and Dr. Marsteller down at the
hospital, they taught infectious diseases and
surgery and obstetrics.
And all those clinical courses you might call,
might call them clinical courses. What was the
average number of courses that these gentlemen
taught?
I'd say about four.
I guess that'd be about right. They didn't leave
much time for research or anything else, did they?
No, nobody did any research. Now, Dr. Schmidt did
some research, but he didn't teach. Yeah. Right.
I wonder what the average teaching load is now.
It's probably two, isn't it? I can't answer that.
I've been going 15 years from out there and I don't
know what the average load is. I imagine it's about
15 hours, not courses. I probably teach one or two
courses a semester. It's a trimester now. It's
going back to the semester. Can you tell me who your
favorite professors were?
They all were. I guess Dr. Francis, Dr. Leonard,
Dr. Price. Now Dr. Dunn, he just taught some
special courses like poultry diseases,
and I
think that's all he gave us. But you see he was in the
in the laboratory producing whole-collar,
anti-whole-collar serum and virus, and that was
shipped all over the in the state. So that was